---
title: "TB Phylogenetics"
---

# Building a Phylogenetic Tree

::: {.callout-tip}
### Questions

- How can I produce a multiple sequence alignment of TB sequences?
- How can I build a phylogenetic tree from my alignment?
- How can I visualize and annotate my tree with metadata?
- How can I scale my tree based on sampling dates?

### Learning Objectives

- Use nf-core/bactmap to produce a multiple sequence alignment.
- Use IQ-tree for phylogenetic tree inference.
- Visualize and annotate tree in R with ggtree library.
- Use BEAST2 to obtain a time-scaled phylogenetic tree using sample collection dates.

:::

## TB phylogenetics

## TB dataset

## Mapping/Alignment 

For this practical, we're going to build a phylogenetic tree using a multiple sequence alignment we generate with `nf-core/bactmap`.

## Tree inference: IQ-Tree,

```bash
snp-sites \
    GPSC33.masked.aln \
    -o GPSC33.masked_snps.aln

snp-sites \
    -C GPSC33.masked.aln \
    >  GPSC33.constant_sites.txt
```

```bash
iqtree \
    -fconst GPSC33.constant_sites.txt \
    -s GPSC33.masked_snps.aln \
    -nt auto \
    -ntmax 8 \
    -mem 8G \
    -m GTR \
    -bb 1000
```

## Visualization and annotation in ggtree


## Time-scaled phylogenies

The trees that we build from sequence data are scaled using the mutation rate estimated from the sequence alignments. This is useful if we want to know, for example, on average how many mutations separate different branches of the tree.

Another way to scale trees is to use time. For most genome sequences, we usually have information about their date of collection, and this can be used to scale the phylogeny using the date information. The idea is to rescale the trees such that the x-axis of the tree represents a date rather than number of mutations.

There are a number of tools available for generating time-scaled trees which vary in complexity and the resources, including time, they require.  For this practical we're going to use `BEAST2`.

## Summary


:::highlight

**Key Points**
- We can time-scale trees using sample collection date information. The program `BEAST2` can be used to achieve this. 

:::